-----------------------8 Aug 2019------------------------------

Papua New Guinea has highest number of ‘living’ indigenous languages in world 
 
Pacific island nation of Papua New Guinea, Country in Oceania has highest number of ‘living’ indigenous languages in world (840). Living languages stands for languages that are still being used and spoken by people. India stands fourth in list with 453 languages.
 In 2016, United Nation’s Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues (UNPFII) highlighted that 40% of estimated 6,700 languages spoken around world were in danger of disappearing.
 Contents
 Ethnologue is a directory of languages which lists 7,111 living languages worldwide.
 According to Ethnologue-
 3,741 languages (over half total) which have fewer than 1,000 speakers.
 Some language families are very diverse and have several languages under them, but are spoken by only a small percentage of population. For example, Trans-New Guinea family, which has 478 languages, accounts for just 0.05% of total language speakers.
 Indo-European family has 445 languages including Spanish, English, German, Punjabi and Bengali and has highest percentage of speakers- 46.31%.
 Most Indian languages are derivatives of languages that are spoken in other parts of Asia as well, for example- Sino-Tibetan languages are spoken across Northeast India, China, Bhutan, Nepal and other South East Asian countries. One of outliers to this trend is Andamanese language family, which is confined to India alone.
 Greenberg’s Diversity Index
 As per Ethnologue, ‘Greenberg’s diversity index’ is the probability that any two people of country selected at random would have different mother tongues.
 Value ranges from: 0-1, where ‘0’ indicates no diversity i.e. everyone has same mother tongue and ‘1’ indicates total diversity i.e. no two people will have same mother tongue. Therefore higher diversity index would mean more languages spread across country.
 Most widely spoken languages worldwide: English, Chinese, Hindi, Arabic and Spanish are most widely spoken languages worldwide when only 1st-languages are considered. These 5 languages account for what is spoken by over 40% of people worldwide.
 Number of Languages by Region– Asia (2303) and Africa (2140) account for highest number of indigenous languages (over 70% of total), Pacific (1322) and Americas (1058).
 Widely English-speaking nations- United States (335 languages) and Australia (319) are among countries where highest number of languages are spoken this is because they have small and rapidly declining pockets of indigenous language speaking populations.
 Languages in Decline
 As per UNESCO’s ‘Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger‘-
 Since 1950 228 languages have become extinct.
 About 10% of languages are classified ‘vulnerable’, while another 10% are ‘critically endangered’.
 In India, 5 languages have become extinct since 1950, while 42 are critically endangered.
 Several languages are now “endangered” and in case of languages such as Tiniguan (Colombian origin), there is just a single native speaker left.
 The year 2019 is designated as United Nations’ International Year of Indigenous Languages. It aims to promote native tongues in 5 key areas-
  


 
 
 Key Findings of Ethnologue
 Global Distribution of Languages
 International Year of Indigenous Languages
 Increasing understanding, reconciliation and international cooperation
 Integration of indigenous languages into standard setting
 Empowerment through capacity building.
 Creation of favourable conditions for knowledge-sharing and dissemination of good practices with regards to indigenous languages
 Growth and development via elaboration of new knowledge
 vvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvv
-----------------------8 Aug 2019------------------------------

Parliament passes Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Amendment Bill, 2019 
 
Parliament passed Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Amendment Bill, 2019 for speedy eviction of unauthorised occupants from government residential accommodations. The Bill amends Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 which provides for eviction of unauthorised occupants from public premises in certain cases.
 The bill provides for strict provisions to evict illegal occupants from government property allotted to government officials and members of Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha.
 Residential accommodation: It has been defined as occupation of public premises by person on grant of license for such occupation. Such license must be given for fixed tenure or for period person holds office.  Further, occupation must be allowed under rules made by Central, State/UT government, or a statutory authority (such as Parliament Secretariat, or Central Government Company or premises belonging to state government).
 Notice for eviction: It adds detailed provision laying down procedure for eviction from residential accommodation. It empowers estate officer to issue written notice to person if he/she is in unauthorised occupation of residential accommodation within three working days. This means that the bill now enables estate officer to apply summary proceedings for evicting the unauthorised occupants after a three-day notice.
 Order of eviction: After considering the cause shown and making any other inquiries, estate officer can give eviction order. If person fails to comply with order, then estate officer may evict such person from residential accommodation and take possession of it.  For this purpose, estate officer can also use such force as required.
 Also, estate officer now does not need to follow elaborate proceedings like serving notice, show cause, inquiry, rather he or she can initiate summary eviction proceedings.
 Payment of damages: If any person in unauthorised occupation of residential accommodation challenges eviction order passed by estate officer in court, then he is required to pay damages charges for every month of such occupation or accommodation held during period of litigation.
  


 
 
 vvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvv
-----------------------8 Aug 2019------------------------------

India contributes US$ 5 million to UNRWA in support of Palestine refugees 
 
India has contributed US $5 million to United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). The contribution was provided in support of UNRWA’s core programmes and services, including education, health care, and relief and social services.
 It is relief and human development agency of UN which supports more than 5 million registered Palestinian refugees, and their descendants. It is only UN agency dedicated to help refugees from specific region or conflict. It is separate from UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
 Founded: It was established December 1949 following 1948 Arab-Israeli conflict by UN General Assembly (UNGA) Resolution 302 (IV).
 Mandate: Its mandate is to contribute to welfare and human development of Palestine refugees, who had fled or were expelled from their homes during 1948 Palestine war as well during and following 1967 Six Day war.
 Services: It originally offered services intended to provide jobs on public works projects and direct relief, but now it provides services like education, health care, and social services to population it supports. It also allows refugee status to be inherited by descendants. Currently, it serves about 5.3 million refugees scattered around Middle East.
 Areas of Operation: It provides aid in 5 areas of operation viz. Lebanon, Syria, Jordan, Gaza Strip and West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Whereas, UNHCR provides aid for Palestinian refugees outside these five areas.
 Funded: It is funded by voluntary contributions from member states of UN. It also receives some funding from regular budget of UN (mostly used for international staffing costs). India has increased its annual financial contribution to UNRWA from US $1.25 million in 2016 to US$ 5 million in 2018 and 2019.
  


 
 
 vvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvv
-----------------------8 Aug 2019------------------------------

8 August: India observes 77th anniversary of Quit India movement 
 
Every year 8 August is celebrated in India as August Kranti Din, in which tribute is paid to revolutionaries who sacrificed their lives in freedom struggle against rule. Also teachings given by Father of the Nation (Bapu), Mahatma Gandhi are remembered.
 8 August 2019 is being observed as 77th anniversary of August Kranti Din, which is considered as one of important milestones in history of freedom struggle of our country.
 Why 8 August? Every year 8 August is remembered as a conch shell of last battle for independence in Indian history. On this day in 1942, foundation of Quit India Movement, run by Mahatma Gandhi was laid, after which whole of India united against British and British rule had to kneel down. Since Independence, 8 August is known as Revolution Day and ground in Bombay where it was started by hoisting flag is known as Kranti Maidan.
 77 years of Quit India Movement (or August Movement): When British did not fulfill their promise to liberate India even after taking help from India in 2nd world war and when Cripps Mission (March 1942) also failed, then On August 8, 1942 Mahatma Gandhi gave a clarion call to end the British rule and launched the Quit India Movement (or Bharat Chodo Andolan). The proposal for this movement was passed in Bombay session of All India Congress Committee on 08 August which paved way for a mass movement to attain independence. As Quit India Movement was launched in month of August, it is also known as August Movement or August Kranti.
 On 8th August 1942, as a precursor to India’s independence, Quit India Movement was launched at Mumbai’s historic Gowalia Tank Maidan, now popularly known as August Kranti Maidan. Also Gandhiji gave the call to Do or Die in his Quit India speech delivered at Gowalia Tank Maida, which inspired thousands of party workers but also created a frenzy among British who rushed to imprison entire Congress leadership.
 Only then Gandhiji was imprisoned at Aga Khan Palace in Pune and almost all leaders were arrested. In such a situation, young leader Aruna Asif Ali hoisted Quit India movement by hoisting tricolor at Gwalia Tank Ground in Mumbai on 9 August.
  


 
 
 vvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvv
-----------------------8 Aug 2019------------------------------

Top Current Affairs Today’s News Headlines – 8 August 2019 
 
Here are the top current affairs Today’s News Headlines of 8 August 2019 for all competitive examinations of India.
 Contents
  


 
 
 National Current Affairs
 Economy & Business Current AffairsMONETARY POLICY REVIEW
 MONETARY POLICY REVIEW
 International Current Affairs
 Sports Current Affairs
 Parliament passes bill increasing the number of judges in Supreme Court from 31 to 34 including the Chief Justice of India
 Former External Affairs Minister and Delhi’s ex-Chief Minister Sushma Swaraj dies in New Delhi at the age of 67
 Producer Director J. Om Prakash dies in Mumbai at 93
 ISRO announces launch pf Vikram Sarabhai Journalism Award in Space Science, Technology and Research
 BSE Sensex: 36,691 (–286), NSE Nifty: 10,856 (–93)
 India signs United Nations Convention on International Settlement Agreements (UNISA)
 RBI cuts repo rate to 5.4% from the current 5.75%
 Reverse repo rate under liquidity adjustment facility stands revised to 5.15%
 Marginal standing facility (MSF) rate and the bank rate reduced to 6%
 Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) decides to maintain the ‘accommodative’ stance
 All members of MPC voted to reduce the policy repo rate
 MPC members: Ravindra Dholakia, Michael Debabrata Patra, Bibhu Prasad, Shaktikanta Das, Chetan Ghate and Pami Dua
 GDP growth forecast for 2019-20 lowered to 6.9% from 7% earlier
 GDP growth forecast in 1st half of 2019-20 in the range of 5.8 to 6.6%
 GDP growth forecast in 2nd half of 2019-20 in the range of 7.3% to 7.5%
 Consumer price index (CPI)-based inflation forecast at 3.1% during July-September 2019 and at 3.5-3.7% in October-March 2019-20
 Pakistan expels Indian High Commissioner Ajay Bisaria, downgrades diplomatic ties with India
 India contributes USD 5 million to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) for Palestinian Refugees
 Pacific island nation of Papua New Guinea has the highest number of ‘living’ indigenous languages in the world (840)
 Indian Grandmaster Surya Shekhar Ganguly wins Belt and Road China Hunan International chess tournament in China
 Badminton player P. V. Sindhu is the only Indian in the list of 15 Highest-Paid Female Athletes 2019 released by Forbes
 India (150/3 in 19.1) beat West Indies (146/6) by seven wickets in the third T20 International at Providence, Guyana, to complete a 3-0 sweep; Deepak Chahar (3/4) is Man of the Match and Krunal Pandya is Man of the Series
 South African bowler Dale Steyn retires from test cricket at 36 after picking 439 wickets in 93 Tests at an average of 22.9
 Germany’s Fiona Kolbinger wins the mixed annual 4,000km cycling Transcontinental Race (Bulgaria: July 27–France: August 5), becoming the first woman to do so
 vvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvv
-----------------------8 Aug 2019------------------------------

Rajya Sabha passes National Institute of Design (Amendment) Bill, 2019 
 
Rajya Sabha has passed National Institute of Design (Amendment) Bill, 2019. Now it has to be passed by Lok Sabha. The Bill seeks to amend National Institute of Design Act, 2014, which declares National Institute of Design (NID), Ahmedabad as an institution of national importance.
 It seeks to declare four National Institutes of Design (NID) in Andhra Pradesh (Amaravati), Assam (Jorhat), Madhya Pradesh (Bhopal) and Haryana (Kurukshetra) as institutions of national importance.
 Currently, these institutes are registered as Societies under Societies Registration Act, 1860 and do not have power to grant degrees or diplomas. Once these four institutions are declared of national importance, they will be granted the power to grant degrees and diplomas.
 Significance of National Importance Tag
 It will help to produce highly skilled manpower in design sector which in turn, will create job opportunities, both direct and indirect. It will also provide sustainable design interventions for handloom, crafts, rural technology, small, medium (SMEs) and large scale enterprises (LSEs); and outreach programmes for capacity, capability and institution building.
  


 
 
 vvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvv
-----------------------8 Aug 2019------------------------------

IIT Guwahati Researchers develop portable device to detect bacteria without lab tests 
 
A team of researchers at Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati (IIT-G) has developed portable diagnostic device to detect bacteria without cell culture or microbiological assays. Researchers team work has been patented as well as published in July 2019 issue of Journal of Materials Chemistry of Royal Society of Chemistry.
 Function: This hand-held device is well equipped to detect bacteria instantaneously without need for lab tests. The device has a bio-compatible sensor that can also diagnose time-critical illnesses such as meningitis. These rapid detection kits are like those used for blood sugar monitoring or pregnancy detection.
 Working Principle: It is Organic Field Effect Transistor (OFET)–based Bacteria Sensor (or Bacterial Diagnostic device) which has been shown to have ability to detect bacteria and distinguish between Gram positive bacteria (such as S pneumoniae) and Gram negative (such as the common E. coli) types. Currently detection of bacteria in body fluids is done in laboratories. OFET is an electronic device that works on principle that charges in vicinity of channels of certain semiconductors can induce a current in them. Therefore, charges on surface of bacterium, induces a current in OFET, which is registered and read.
 OFET devices developed by IIT-G team consists of a unique and hybrid tri-layer dielectric system built on simple glass and flexible PET (a kind of plastic) substrates, and can operate at ultra-low operating voltages.
 Need: Across the world bacterial infection is a common cause of morbidity and mortality and even despite development of a range of antibiotics, challenge continues to lie in diagnosing bacterial infection early on. Also,
 Significance: Present techniques used are extremely time- consuming as cells derived from a patient are cultured or grown in laboratories to detect and microanalyse bacteria. However, this new portable device, can instantly detect charges on cell walls of bacteria.
 Application: This research has enabled rapid detection of bacteria, which is not just important in healthcare but also in anti- bioterrorism measures as well as environmental monitoring.
  


 
 
 vvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvv
-----------------------8 Aug 2019------------------------------

United States designates China a ‘Currency Manipulator’ 
 
United States has designated China a “currency manipulator”, after country’s central bank allowed Yuan (Chinese Currency) to fall against dollar. This move could escalate tense trade relations between two nations.
 Background
 During US Presidential elections in 2016, US President Donald Trump had promised to label China as a currency manipulator, but it was on hold until now as US Department of Treasury kept country on its watch list, declining to take any step. But now US Treasury Department has announced and determined that China is a ‘Currency Manipulator’.
 US Aruguments:
 US accused China of manipulating its currency to gain unfair competitive advantage in international trade and that China still targets on continuing to receive hundreds of billions of dollars which it have been taking from US with unfair trade practices and currency manipulation.
 Further US treasury department also alleged that China has a long history of facilitating an undervalued currency through sustained, large-scale intervention in FOREX market.
 The Trigger: This recent action by US to designate China as a ‘Currency Manipulator’ came after China allowed its yuan to weaken past key 7-per-dollar level for the 1st time in more than a decade.
 China Arguments:
 As per Central Bank of China depreciation in its currency was due to effects of unilateralist and trade-protectionist measures and expectations for tariffs against China.
 Way Ahead: US will now engage with International Monetary Fund (IMF) to eliminate unfair competitive advantage created by China’s latest actions. This move could further escalate tense trade relations between two nations.
  


 
 
 vvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvv
-----------------------8 Aug 2019------------------------------

RACE: Rajasthan’s New Higher Education Model 
 
State government of Rajasthan has launched a new higher education model titled- Resource Assistance for Colleges with Excellence or RACE, for distribution of faculties and movable assets among government colleges at district level so as to rationalise availability of resources.
 RACE model will create a pool for sharing of facilities which will benefit colleges that lack infrastructure.
 Need: Even though sanctioned posts of teachers in government colleges are 6,500, at present the posts falls short by about 2,000 teachers. Therefore until additional posts are created and new appointments made, RACE is expected to help channelise resources and ensure quality education.
 Working: Colleges in need will submit their requirement to nodal college in district, which will send teachers on deputation, if needed, and provide facilities like projectors, digital libraries, equipment and technicians.
 Benefits:
 With the adoption of this new model, all colleges would get equal opportunities for imparting quality education.
 RACE will give autonomy to small colleges and help them find solutions to their problems at local level. It will also help colleges situated in small towns facing shortage of faculties and infrastructure.
  


 
 
 vvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvv
-----------------------8 Aug 2019------------------------------

Bangladesh- Russia signs uranium supply deal 
 
Bangladesh signed deal with Russia for lifetime supply of uranium for its 2,400 MW Rooppur Nuclear Power Plant (RNPP) in Bangladesh. Under the deal, Russia will supply nuclear fuel needed for plant during its entire life cycle. RNPP will come into operation by 2022.
 Deal was signed in Dhaka (Bangladesh capital) between Bangladesh Atomic Energy Commission (BAEC) and Russian Nuclear Fuel Supply Company (TVEL) Joint Stock Company, a Russian state-owned nuclear fuel firm. BAEC is tasked with implementing project.
 It is a framework agreement that focuses on pricing methodology. Through this agreement, both countries will work to determine prices of nuclear fuel, considering volatile global market which is marked by continuous changes.
 RNPP Project:
 In 2017, two countries (Russia and Bangladesh) have also signed spent fuel sent back agreement for management of nuclear waste of Rooppur Nuclear Power Plant (RNPP).
 Work on these two units of Rooppur Nuclear Power Plant (RNPP), each producing 1200 MW of electricity is scheduled to be completed in 2022 and 2024 respectively.
 With power generation capacity of 1200 MW, each unit of power plant will have to reload one-third (33%) of total required nuclear fuel in every 18 months (1.5 years), and 1st, 2nd and 3rd reload will be provided by Russian firm free of cost.
  


 
 
 vvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvv
